[docs] First draft of the Tree View custom plugin doc (#11564)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/tree-view/rich-tree-view/headless/headless.md

---

# Rich Tree View - Headless

<p class="description">Create your custom tree view.</p>

:::warning
The `useTreeView` hook is not public API for now,
this page is still a _Work in Progress_ and its content is not meant to be used in production.
:::

## Create a custom plugin

### Basic plugin

A custom plugins contains 2 required elements:

1. A hook that will be executed by the `useTreeView` hook:

   ```ts
   const useCustomPlugin = ({ params }) => {
     React.useEffect(() => {
       console.log(params.customParam);
     });
   };
   ```

2. A property containing the params used by this topic:

   ```ts
   useCustomPlugin.params = {
     customParam: true,
   };
   ```

### Params default value

You can use the `getDefaultizedParams` property to set a default value to your plugin params:

```ts
const useCustomPlugin = ({ params }) => {
  React.useEffect(() => {
    console.log(params.customParam);
  });
};

useCustomPlugin.params = { customParam: true };

useCustomPlugin.getDefaultizedParams = (params) => ({
  ...params,
  customParam: params.customParam ?? false,
});
```

### Controllable models

A model is a value that can either be controlled or initialized using a prop.

> The Tree View contains several models like the `expandedNodes` model which contains the id of the nodes currently expanded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tree View contains several models like the `expandedNodes` model which contains the ids of the nodes currently expanded.
```

You can create your own models using the `models` property of your plugin:

```ts
useCustomPlugin.params = {
  // ...other params
  defaultCustomModel: true,
  customModel: true,
};

useCustomPlugin.getDefaultizedParams = (params) => ({
  ...params,
  // ... other defaultized params
  defaultCustomModel: params.defaultCustomModel ?? false,
});

useCustomPlugin.models = {
  customModel: {
    getDefaultValue: (params) => defaultCustomModel,
  },
};
```

:::info

> When creating a model, you should always set a default value to your `defaultXXX` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a model, you should always set a default value to your `defaultCustomModel` prop. This will initialize the component's internal state when the model is uncontrolled.
```

See the [Params default value](/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/headless/#params-default-value) section for more information.
:::

You can then use this model in your plugin (or in any other plugin) using the `models` parameter:

```ts
const useCustomPlugin = ({ models }) => {
  React.useEffect(() => {
    console.log(models.customModel.value);
  });

  const updateCustomModel = (newValue) =>

>     models.customModel.setControlledValue(newValue);

Reviewer: Should we mention that each model contains a value and an updater?

Author: I can do a follow up diving deeper on the model part :ok_hand:

---
productId: x-tree-view
title: Rich Tree View - Headless
components: RichTreeView, TreeItem
packageName: '@mui/x-tree-view'
githubLabel: 'component: tree view'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/treeview/
---

# Rich Tree View - Headless

<p class="description">Create your custom tree view.</p>

:::warning
The `useTreeView` hook is not public API for now,
this page is still a _Work in Progress_ and its content is not meant to be used in production.
:::

## Create a custom plugin

### Basic plugin

A custom plugins contains 2 required elements:

1. A hook that will be executed by the `useTreeView` hook:

   ```ts
   const useCustomPlugin = ({ params }) => {
     React.useEffect(() => {

>        console.log(params.customParam);

Reviewer: I honestly like the differentiation between `props` and `params` here. But I have nothing against renaming if you think it would make these concepts easier for users to understand 🤔

  UseCustomPluginInstance,
  // The events emitted by your plugin
  UseCustomPluginEvents,
  // The states defined by your plugin
  UseCustomPluginState,
  // The name of the models defined by your plugin
  UseCustomPluginModelNames,
  // The plugins this plugin needs to work correctly
  UseCustomPluginDependantPlugins
>;
```

The most basic plugin would have the following signature:

```ts
type UseCustomPluginSignature = TreeViewPluginSignature<
  {},
  {},
  {},
  {},
  {},
  never,
  []
>;
```

The plugin built in the sections above would have the following signature:

```ts
type UseCustomPluginSignature = TreeViewPluginSignature<
  // Params
  { customParam?: boolean; customModel?: boolean; defaultCustomModel?: boolean },
  // Defaultized params
  // `customParam` and `defaultCustomModel` have a default value defined in `getDefaultizedParams`
  { customParam: boolean; customModel?: boolean; defaultCustomModel: boolean },
  // Instance
  { toggleCustomModel: () => void },
  // Events
  'toggleCustomModel',
  // State
  {},
  // Model names
  'customModel',
  // Dependant plugns,
  [UseTreeViewExpansionSignature]
>;
```

## Examples

> ### Log expanded items

Author: I just copied the existing example, but we should clearly improve it before making this page public.

IMHO this is not the focus of this PR.
